.TH NEONSEC 1 "2025-09-05" "neonsec 1.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
neonsec \- streaming security analytics CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B neonsec analyze
[\-\-input FILE|\-] [\-\-input\-format csv|ndjson] [\-\-format text|json|ndjson] [\-\-output FILE]
[\-\-window SEC] [\-\-portscan N] [\-\-bruteforce N] [\-\-ddos\-events N] [\-\-ddos\-uniq N] [\-\-anomaly\-z Z]
[\-\-plugin PATH]... [\-\-metrics HOST:PORT|\:PORT] [\-\-sarif FILE] [\-\-rules FILE] [\-\-threads N] [\-\-sample 1/N] [\-\-config FILE]
[\-\-pcap FILE | \-\-pcap\-live IFACE]
.PP
.B neonsec validate
[\-\-config FILE] [\-\-rules FILE] [\-\-input FILE] [\-\-input\-format csv|ndjson]
.SH DESCRIPTION
neonsec processes CSV/NDJSON logs to detect scans, brute force, volumetric spikes and anomalies; outputs text/JSON/NDJSON/SARIF; exposes Prometheus metrics.

.SH OPTIONS (ADDITIONAL)
\fB--redact\fR  Mask PII in output (IPs and usernames)
\fB--max-findings N\fR  Print at most N findings (exit still 3 with --fail-on-findings)
.SH OPTIONS (PRIVACY)
\fB--pseudonymize\fR  Replace PII with stable tokens derived from optional \fB--pseudonymize-salt\fR.
\fB--redact\fR  Mask PII without correlation.
\fB--summary\fR  Print per-type counts at end (stderr).
.SH OUTPUT
New formats and flags:
\fB--format yaml\fR  YAML per finding
\fB--ts-format iso|epoch\fR  Affects text/yaml timestamps (JSON stays numeric epoch)
\fB--tee FILE\fR  Duplicate output to FILE in addition to stdout

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.B neonsec doctor
Performs a local environment sanity check (samples, manpage, schemas, tooling).

.SH OPTIONS (MISC)
\fB--dry-run\fR  Parse inputs and report summary/stats without emitting findings.

.SH OPTIONS (SCALING)
\fB--max-records N\fR  Stop after processing N records.
\fB--dedupe\fR  Suppress duplicate findings (type+key) within a single run.

.SH FORMATS
Additional formats:
\fB--format stix\fR  Emit a STIX 2.1-like bundle of observed-data objects (offline generation).
\fB--format html\fR  Emit a single HTML report with a table of findings.

.SH LIMITS
\fB--rlimit-mem MB\fR  Set address-space limit (POSIX).
\fB--rlimit-cpu SEC\fR  Set CPU time limit (POSIX).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS (ADDED)
.B neonsec generate
Emit synthetic records to stdout.

.SH RUN METADATA
\fB--run-id STR\fR  Set a run identifier (also read from NEONSEC_RUN_ID).
\fB--prolog\fR  Emit a first JSON line with run metadata (run_id, ts, format).

.SH OUTPUT ROTATION
\fB--tee-rotate-size MB\fR  Rotate the tee file after MB megabytes.
\fB--tee-rotate-keep N\fR  Keep N rotated files.

.SH SANITIZATION
Bidirectional control characters are stripped from keys/details to prevent visual spoofing.

.SH DIFFERENTIAL REPORTING
\fB--baseline FILE\fR  Suppress findings whose `(type,key)` appear in FILE (supports NDJSON produced by neonsec or CSV `ts,type,key,details`).
\fB--suppress-file FILE\fR  File with one pattern per line `type:key` supporting `*` and `?` wildcards (`*:*` matches all).
\fB--suppress PATTERN\fR  Add a single inline suppression pattern.

.SH OUTPUT SANITIZATION
\fB--ascii-only\fR  Replace non-ASCII characters in `key/details` with spaces (in addition to control-char filtering).
BiDi control characters are always stripped to prevent visual spoofing.

.SH EPILOGUE
\fB--epilogue\fR  Emit a final JSON line with `{run_id,total,sha256}` — a digest of all emitted lines for tamper-evidence.

.SH TIME WINDOW
\fB--since EPOCH\fR  Process only findings with ts >= EPOCH.
\fB--until EPOCH\fR  Process only findings with ts <= EPOCH.

.SH SELECTORS
\fB--only-type GLOB\fR, \fB--skip-type GLOB\fR  Filter by finding type (repeatable, `*` and `?` supported).
\fB--only-key GLOB\fR, \fB--skip-key GLOB\fR  Filter by key.
\fB--only-details GLOB\fR, \fB--skip-details GLOB\fR  Filter by details substring/glob.

.SH CSV HEADER
\fB--csv-header\fR  Emit a header line `ts,type,key,details` before findings.

.SH INDEX
\fB--index-output FILE\fR  Write byte offsets (one per finding) relative to the start of the output stream.

.SH SUPPRESSION AUDIT
\fB--audit-suppressions FILE\fR  Write a JSON summary with counts of suppressed findings (baseline vs. each pattern).

.SH FLUSHING
\fB--flush\fR  Flush stdout and tee after each emitted record (useful when piping to slow consumers).

.SH RATE LIMIT
\fB--rate-limit RPS\fR  Limit emission to RPS records/second (applies to stdout and tee).

.SH TEXT TEMPLATE
\fB--text-template STR\fR  Custom template for text output. Placeholders: `{ts}`, `{type}`, `{key}`, `{details}`. Appends `\n` automatically.

.SH SUMMARY JSON
\fB--summary-json FILE\fR  Write a JSON summary (`processed`, `findings`, per-type counts, and optionally `top` keys if `--summary-top` is used).

.SH DEDUPLICATION WINDOW
\fB--dedupe-window SEC\fR  Suppress repeated (type,key) emitted within SEC seconds.

.SH MINIMUM KEY COUNT
\fB--min-key-count N\fR  Emit only (type,key) groups with at least N occurrences in the run. Implies \fB--stable-order\fR.

.SH BUCKET SUMMARY
\fB--bucket-summary FILE\fR  Write a JSON histogram of counts by time bucket (and per type).
\fB--bucket-size SEC\fR  Bucket size in seconds (required with --bucket-summary).

.SH INPUT VALIDATION & REDACTION
\fB--validate-input\fR  Validate each record minimally (`ts` non-negative; `type`/`key` non-empty). Tally invalids; with \fB--strict\fR aborts on first invalid.
\fB--redact-patterns FILE\fR  ECMAScript regexes (one per line) applied to `key` and `details` (after BiDi/ascii sanitization).
\fB--redact-repl STR\fR  Replacement string for redactions (default `***`).

.SH REPORTING
\fB--report-html FILE\fR  Write a standalone HTML report (summary and Top-N per type if `--summary-top` is set).
\fB--artifact-dir DIR\fR  Create a directory with a `manifest.json` and copies of `--summary-json` / `--bucket-summary` if present.

.SH PIDFILE
\fB--pidfile FILE\fR  Write the current process id to FILE and remove it on clean exit.

.SH SAMPLING
\fB--sample-rate P\fR  Keep only a fraction P (0..1) of findings, chosen by a PRNG seeded with \fB--sample-seed\fR.
\fB--sample-seed S\fR  Seed for the sampling PRNG to make runs reproducible.

.SH SPLIT OUTPUT
\fB--split-output DIR\fR  Also write emitted findings into partitioned files under DIR.
\fB--split-by type|key|ts\fR  Partition key. For `ts`, combine with \fB--split-bucket SEC\fR.

.SH ERROR BUDGET
\fB--max-errors N\fR  With \fB--validate-input\fR, abort after N invalid records (N<0 disables the limit).

.SH SELFTEST
\fBneonsec selftest\fR  Run a quick in-binary self-check for sanitization and redaction.

.SH TAMPER-EVIDENT CHAIN
\fB--chain\fR  Append a per-record SHA-256 chain digest that links each record to the previous one (also reflected in JSON/CSV).

.SH NEWLINES & TEE MODE
\fB--newline lf|crlf\fR  Normalize output newlines (default lf).
\fB--tee-mode append|truncate\fR  Open the tee file in append (default) or truncate mode.

.SH IP MASKING
\fB--ip-mask N\fR  IPv4 masking: zero host bits for /N (supports 8,16,24). Applied to `key` and `details` after redaction/sanitization.

.SH MARKDOWN REPORT
\fB--report-md FILE\fR  Write a Markdown summary (counts by type, optional Top-N).

.SH GROUPED COUNTS
\fB--group-output FILE\fR  Write grouped counts as JSON.
\fB--group-by type|key\fR  Select the grouping dimension.

.SH RECORD IDENTIFIER & BYTE BUDGET
\fB--record-id\fR  Include a monotonically increasing record id in outputs (JSON field, CSV column, or text suffix).
\fB--record-id-start N\fR  Starting value (default 1).
\fB--max-output-bytes N\fR  Stop emitting once N bytes have been written (stdout + tee accounted).

.SH UTF-8 STRICT
\fB--utf8-strict\fR  Replace any invalid UTF-8 byte sequences in `key` and `details` with `?` after sanitization/redaction.

.SH ERROR METRICS
\fB--errors-json FILE\fR  Write a JSON with `invalid` and drop counters (`sample`, `selector`, `dedupe`, `mincount`) and `truncated` flag.

.SH HMAC SIGNING
\fB--hmac-secret STR\fR  Append an HMAC-SHA256 of each emitted record (JSON `hmac`, CSV column, or text suffix).

\fB--hmac-env VAR\fR  Read the secret from environment variable VAR.

.SH OUTPUT FILE
\fB--out FILE\fR  Write primary output to FILE instead of stdout.

\fB--atomic-out\fR  Write to `FILE.tmp` and atomically rename to `FILE` on success.

.SH LIMIT FINDINGS
\fB--limit-findings N\fR  Stop after emitting N findings (useful for samples and smoke tests).

.SH TIMESTAMP OFFSET
\fB--ts-offset SEC\fR  Shift timestamps by SEC in output and buckets.

.SH ANOMALY DETECTION
\fB--anomaly-zscore T\fR  Threshold for z-score.

\fB--anomaly-window SEC\fR  Sliding window width in seconds across bucketed counts.

\fB--anomaly-output FILE\fR  Write anomalies as a JSON array.

.SH PII PRESETS
\fB--pii-preset basic|strict\fR  Enable built-in PII redaction patterns (emails, phones, IPv6, MAC; \fIstrict\fR also masks SSN/IBAN-like); credit cards validated by Luhn are redacted.

.SH TEE ROTATION (TIME-BASED)
\fB--tee-rotate-interval SEC\fR  Rotate the \fB--tee\fR file every SEC seconds (in addition to size-based rotation).

.SH SHARDING
\fB--shard-count N\fR  Number of shards; when >0, only the selected shard is emitted.
\fB--shard-index I\fR  Zero-based shard index for this process.
\fB--shard-by key|type|id\fR  Choose the sharding key (default: key).

.SH DETAILS TRUNCATION
\fB--details-max N\fR  Truncate `details` to at most N bytes (UTF-8 safe best-effort) and optionally add an ellipsis.
\fB--no-ellipsis\fR  Disable ellipsis when truncating.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
\fBneonsec digest --input FILE\fR  Print SHA-256 of FILE.

\fBneonsec verify-out --input FILE --format csv|ndjson|json|text [--hmac-secret S]\fR  Verify HMAC per-record (chain is ignored for portability).

.SH BLOOM FILTER DEDUP
\fB--bloom-bits N\fR  Bit size of the Bloom filter (e.g., 8e7 for ~10MB).
\fB--bloom-hash-count K\fR  Number of hash rounds (default 2).
\fB--bloom-key key|type|type+key|record\fR  Key used for membership.
\fB--bloom-state FILE\fR  Persist/load Bloom bitset to/from FILE (binary).

.SH TRANSFORM EXPLAINABILITY
\fB--explain-transform\fR  Add an `explain` field/column/suffix enumerating the transformations applied to each record.

.SH INPUT DIGEST
\fB--input-digest-out FILE\fR  Write the SHA-256 of the input file used in this run.

.SH SIGNALS
Graceful termination on SIGINT/SIGTERM to finalize state and artifacts.

.SH SCHEMA ENFORCEMENT
\fB--schema FILE\fR  Load a simple key=value schema file (lines: `type.pattern=...`, `type.deny=...`, `key.pattern=...`, `key.deny=...`, `details.maxlen=N`).
\fB--schema-enforce warn|strict\fR  On violation, either warn/track (warn) or drop (strict).

.SH PER-KEY RATE LIMIT
\fB--limit-key-rate N\fR  Maximum N records per key within the window.

\fB--limit-key-window SEC\fR  Sliding window size in seconds for per-key limiting.

.SH JSON PRETTY PRINT
\fB--json-indent N\fR  Pretty-print JSON output with N-space indentation (only for `--format json`).

.SH PROFILING
\fB--profile-json FILE\fR  Write run-level profiling JSON (`wall_ms`, `processed`, `emitted`, `invalid`, and `dropped.*` counters).
